Speaker A: A new survey has found that 90% of Canadians say that they have been tricked at one time or another by fake news or misinformation on social media and they identify the main internet platforms including Facebook as among the culprits.
Speaker A: The survey raises the issue of the growing credibility problem of the social media and the question of public trust in the medium including political content.
Speaker A: And that raises a problem for governments who are under growing pressure to intervene to try to get the social media to clean up their act.
Speaker A: The survey was conducted by Ipsos for the Canadian Center for International Governance Innovation.
Speaker A: Joining me now is Fen Hampson.
Speaker A: He's Cgi's director of Global Security and politics.
Speaker A: Thanks for coming in.
Speaker B: My pleasure, Martin.
Speaker A: Okay, I give everyone in a in a in a sort of a thumbnail sketch of what the survey found.
Speaker A: But basically, what was the survey turning up in terms of fake news, in terms of misinformation?
Speaker B: Uh well, first of all, Canadians in terms of being skeptical about social media, not trusting social media are no different from the 24 other countries that we conducted the survey in.
Speaker B: There is globally, uh, growing skepticism, growing mistrust in all forms and varieties of social media platforms, although Facebook does seem to be singled out as, uh, as the major culprit here.
Speaker B: Um, having, uh, you know, having said that, um, what's interesting about the very high numbers in Canada 90% as you mentioned, uh, is that people are aware that they've been duped.
Speaker B: Uh, or or have read fake news.
Speaker B: And I think um, that speaks to uh the heightened sensitivity of Canadians.
Speaker B: The fact that you know we're relatively comparatively speaking, highly educated populace.
Speaker B: Um, large number of Facebook users as well as users of other social media platforms.
Speaker B: But uh, uh the fact is that you know people have gotten a wake-up call about what's happening.
Speaker A: Now you mentioned the platforms, I mean people identify the different platforms.
Speaker A: It would seem that Facebook being that 23 million or so Canadians are on Facebook as commonly identified as a source or one of the culprits one of the sort of it goes all the way down the spectrum of different content or platforms.
Speaker B: Well, I think that reflects the fact that there are far more Facebook users in Canada as well as globally then there are uh when it comes to any of the other uh social media platforms.
Speaker B: I mean it is in some ways the preeminent social media platform.
Speaker B: So it's uh it's taking a hit there.
Speaker A: You say that Canadians have a high level of identifying being tricked.
Speaker A: Uh now this is not constantly tricked.
Speaker A: I mean some of I think it's just from time to time.
Speaker B: Awareness.
Speaker A: Awareness of it.
Speaker A: Canadians identify political interference.
Speaker A: Things that have led them to it's affected their discussions with family and friends of politics.
Speaker A: Um, is there any inclination or accusation that is more from say the right-wing sources or left-wing sources?
Speaker B: Well, actually, uh what what's interesting about the survey is that um, when it comes to Canadians, um, it's both right-wing and uh left-wing sources in in equal numbers.
Speaker B: So uh, um, you know, they they they don't see the manipulation as being solely driven by extremist on the right, uh, uh it's it's both extremists on the right and on the left, uh, which is interesting.
Speaker B: Um, what what's also interesting is that you know, Canadians are very low on the scale, uh comparatively speaking, uh less than a majority, around 48% said that uh um, you know, it influences discussions around the family table uh in terms of what they read uh in in social media.
Speaker B: Uh, also discussion with friends uh, uh, and what that tells me is that again compared to others, um, they're not taking what they read on social media as seriously as perhaps other countries.
Speaker A: So Canadians are saying that even although they're tricked at the higher level of higher percentage of people have been aware of being tricked or misled on the internet, they're also saying that in a lower proportion than around the world, they don't feel that it's interfering with them as much politically.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker B: I mean they're they're obviously getting it from other sources.
Speaker B: Again, what's interesting in the survey is we ask them, you know, in terms of who do you distrust the most, who do you distrust the least um, when it comes to traditional media sources um, including television, including uh print media, much higher levels of confidence, much higher levels of trust in the information that's coming.
Speaker B: So uh obviously, you know, I think in an educated populace uh if you read something that sort of makes you raise your eyebrows and you say, is that really true?
Speaker B: Um, most Canadians are obviously going to look to other media sources for verification.
Speaker B: And uh, and traditional media sources uh even though many of them have online platforms, have just much higher levels of trust when it comes to the basic population.
Speaker A: Okay, which is important and interesting.
Speaker A: There's another thing that's.
Speaker A: That's good for you guys.
Speaker A: It's good for us.
Speaker A: I mean that's what we're here for, a credible source uh who can be fact-checked.
Speaker A: What about there was intriguing thing because this was done in 24 other countries an intriguing thing about people are asked if you're getting political misinformation or fake news, where do you think it's coming from?
Speaker A: And it's quite interesting in terms of the United States and Britain and Japan.
Speaker B: Big big variations there.
Speaker B: In the case of Canadians, um, they see the United States as the uh major purveyor of fake news.
Speaker B: You know, in some ways no surprise there.
Speaker B: Uh, you know, Canadians uh are aware of the uh, shall we say declining political discourse south of the border um, presidential tweets uh which uh some people uh will will read.
Speaker B: Um, uh and you know, there's comparability actually with Turkey of all countries.
Speaker B: Turkey and Canada both sort of pointed their fingers at the United States.
Speaker B: In the UK it's Russia.
Speaker B: And there's no question that uh that Russia uh has uh you know been very active on social media with bots and other kinds of um, uh, you know, activities trying to uh influence as we know the Brexit vote uh that took place a couple of years ago, um, trying to uh uh manipulate as we've seen in uh the Ukraine election and the European parliamentary elections.
Speaker B: Uh, you know, there's been a very active disinformation campaign led by the Russians.
Speaker B: So I think a lot of this is kind of where you stand depends on where you sit geographically.
Speaker A: China, uh China was identified as a very high source for people who live in Japan or people live in Hong Kong, mistrustful of China as a source.
Speaker B: Absolutely.
Speaker B: Absolutely.
Speaker B: And and you know there, you know, China is the great uh autocratic superpower that um, you know, is obviously trying to influence uh their neighbors.
Speaker A: So for public uh policy makers and for the governments, what's the challenge and what can they do?
Speaker B: So what's interesting is that in the global poll, people are looking for governments to police social media through greater levels of regulation.
Speaker B: As we've seen in Europe with the uh general data privacy uh regulations uh in Germany, for example, they have very strong laws now online for hate speech.
Speaker B: Um, and what's interesting there in the context of Germany is that people have a higher level of trust in social media because they know it's being regulated or at least one can surmise that.
Speaker B: Um, in the case of Canada, um, people aren't looking so much for governments to regulate social media as for social media to police themselves.
Speaker B: And you know there I think you know Facebook's recent effort to uh uh bring uh you know, transparency in advertising essentially uh you know, checking out advertisers uh through snail mail and and and you know, a physical presence before they'll accept uh uh online advertising.
Speaker B: I think it's probably a positive development.
Speaker A: And yet we've seen some criticism of Facebook.
Speaker A: For example, that I was at the last hearings.
Speaker B: Lots of criticism.
Speaker A: criticism about for example, Facebook is being very vigilant about source of advertising especially during an election campaign.
Speaker A: And yet there's things like that Nancy Pelosi video which they say no that's free comment and we're not going to take that down.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker B: I I think you know there's a big gray zone here.
Speaker B: You know, how much policing do you do?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Um, you know, we we do have in this country uh as uh one finds in the United States uh um, you know, pretty strong freedom of speech laws.
Speaker B: Um, and so um, you know, I think governments including our government uh I mean it's not an absolute right to free speech.
Speaker B: There's some things you can't say.
Speaker B: Um, uh and and so I think you know, one one of the challenges is, you know, how do you bring those those regulatory instruments that we have in the analog world into the digital world?
Speaker A: And as you say, um you're saying you're not turning up a huge appetite or pressure among Canadians for the government to regulate because this is something that this government is wrestling with.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker B: They're looking they're looking for platforms to uh do a better job of policing themselves.
Speaker B: You know, I think at the end of the day we are going to see uh government regulation.
Speaker B: Um, uh it you know, as uh Minister Gold said, probably after the election.
Speaker B: Um, it's very hard to do it before an election uh you know, particularly the end of a legislative period uh uh that we're uh in now.
Speaker B: Um, but you know, I think uh, you know, our question is, do we move in the direction for example the Europeans are going?
Speaker A: Which seems to be so far the gold standard.
Speaker B: Yeah, I mean they're they're Europe is has sort of, you know, as you say set the standard.
Speaker B: I don't know if it's a gold standard.
Speaker B: I might say it's more of a bronze standard.
Speaker B: I think we can probably in some ways do better.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Um, but you know at at the end of the day and and I think you know we're dealing with big global monopolies that have uh and that's certainly true of Facebook.
Speaker B: Um, and it and it's not just what's being posted online and you know how they uh you know, electoral processes uh you know, get manipulated or fake news et cetera.
Speaker B: But it's, you know, what are they doing with our data?
Speaker B: What are they doing with citizen data?
Speaker B: And they're big issues of privacy there.
Speaker B: They're also big economic issues that go with it because their business model is based on on collecting data, uh selling that data uh to uh to uh other platforms uh and other businesses.
Speaker A: Okay, well, I want to thank you for coming in.
Speaker A: We will watch this with great interest.
Speaker A: Obviously it's one of the it's in the forefront of a lot of people's uh concerns and consciousness.
Speaker A: Thanks for coming in.
Speaker B: Good to be with you, Martin.